docs/developer/scipion-on-the-egi-federated-cloud.rst, before:

.. figure:: /docs/images/scipion_logo.gif
   :width: 250
   :alt: scipion logo

.. _scipion-on-the-egi-federated-cloud:

====================================
Scipion in the EOSC
====================================
The European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) initiative will offer researchers a virtual environment with open and seamless services for storage, management, analysis and re-use of research data, across borders and scientific disciplines by federating existing data infrastructures.

EOSC resources can be accessed from the `EOSC portal <https://eosc-portal.eu/>`_.

How to use Scipion in the EOSC
==============================
Scipion cloud is being developed as one of the EOSC-Synergy thematic `services <https://www.eosc-synergy.eu/thematic-services/scipion/>`_ with the aim to appear as an EOSC service in the EOSC portal. 
Currently it can be used from the Infrastructure Manager dashboard as shown in this video or following the next steps:

* Become part of the cryoem.instruct-eric.eu Virtual Organization:
Request membership `here <https://aai.egi.eu/registry/co_petitions/start/coef:225>`_. You will have to login using one of the available identity providers accepted by EGI-Checkin, such as ARIA, ELIXIR, EDUTeams or even your own institution or university.

.. image:: EGILogin.jpg
    :width: 200px
    :align: center
    :height: 100px
    :alt: EGI login

Commit message:

Added scipion service in the EOSC first documentation

docs/developer/scipion-on-the-egi-federated-cloud.rst, after:

.. figure:: /docs/images/scipion_logo.png
   :width: 250
   :alt: scipion logo

.. _scipion-on-the-egi-federated-cloud:

====================================
Scipion in the EOSC
====================================
The European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) initiative will offer researchers a virtual environment with open and seamless services for storage, management, analysis and re-use of research data, across borders and scientific disciplines by federating existing data infrastructures.

EOSC resources can be accessed from the `EOSC portal <https://eosc-portal.eu/>`_.

How to use Scipion in the EOSC
==============================
Scipion cloud is being developed as one of the EOSC-Synergy thematic `services <https://www.eosc-synergy.eu/thematic-services/scipion/>`_ with the aim to appear as an EOSC service in the EOSC portal. 

Currently it is offered by the Instruct Image Processing Center (I2PC) as an Instruct service.

To request it write an email to i2pc@cnb.csic.es providing information on your project and the i2pc team will create a virtual infrastructure for you where you will be able to continue processing your data for a certain period of time. You should also provide your publickey to be injected in the infrastructure which will alow you to copy your data.

Then you will receive an email with the URL to access the virtual infrastructure and the password to login. You will also be informed about the hardware specifications of the infrastructure and limit time to use it.

Information on how to use the infrastructure can be found `here <scipion-infrastructure-cloud-usage>`_.
