docs/user/troubleshooting.rst, before:

.. figure:: /docs/images/scipion_logo.gif
   :width: 250
   :alt: scipion logo

.. _troubleshooting:

===============
Troubleshooting
===============

This page compiles a list of common errors that can appear when
using Scipion.

.. contents::

Installing Scipion/Xmipp from precompiled bundles
=================================================
We have checked the following Operative Systems for the installation using the precompiled bundles:

- Centos7: works with Scipion_Centos and Xmipp_Centos
- Ubuntu16: works with Scipion_Ubuntu and Xmipp_Debian
- Ubuntu18: workks with Scipion_Ubuntu and Xmipp_Debian
- OpenSUSE42.3: works with Scipion_Ubuntu and Xmipp_Debian

For OpenSUSE15 and Debian, installation from sources is needed, so far.

Fixing libjbig.so.0 not found in OpenSUSE42.3
===================================

When Scipion_Ubuntu precompiled bundle is installed, maybe a "libjbig.so.0 not found" error is raised. We have observed that OpenSUSE includes libjbig.so.2 and we have checked that is also valid, thus we propose to link one to the other by

::

  sudo ln -s /usr/lib64/libjbig.so.2 /usr/lib64/libjbig.so.0

Fixing fonts in Ubuntu 18
=========================
The Scipion font is not right in Ubuntu 18. A temporary fix for this is to
move all TK and TCL files in `software/lib` and use the system ones.


Launching Eman boxer protocol
=============================

If you see an error like '*Cannot mix incompatible Qt library (version
0x40806) with this library (version 0x40804)*'. This means the Qt
installed on your computer is conflicting with the Qt distributed with
EMAN2. In most cases it gets solved by removing the Qt that comes with
EMAN2 from EMAN2DIR/extlib/lib.

--------------

Compiling Scipion with OpenCV
=============================

If you have problems compiling Scipion with OpenCV support (CUDA version
>=6.5), e.g. opencv-2.4.9 compilation fails with an error:

::

    Error: target 'software/lib/libopencv_core.so' not built (after running 'make install > /home/user/soft/scipion/software/log/opencv_make_install.log 2>&1')

And log file (*software/log/opencv\_make.log*) shows something like:

::

    [ 9%] Building NVCC (Device) object modules/core/CMakeFiles/cuda_compile.dir/src/cuda/cuda_compile_generated_gpu_mat.cu.o
    /usr/include/string.h: In function ‘void* __mempcpy_inline(void, const void, size_t)’:
    /usr/include/string.h:652:42: error: ‘memcpy’ was not declared in this scope
    return (char *) memcpy (__dest, __src, __n) + __n;
    ^
    CMake Error at cuda_compile_generated_gpu_mat.cu.o.cmake:264 (message):
    Error generating file
    /home/mag/opencv/build_opencv_master/modules/core/CMakeFiles/cuda_compile.dir/src/cuda/./cuda_compile_generated_gpu_mat.cu.o

Then:

1. `Find <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nvidia_Tesla>`__ the
   micro-architecture name for your GPU card, e.g. Kepler for K40 or
   Fermi for M2070 card
2. ``cd $SCIPION_HOME/software/tmp/opencv-2.4.9``
3. Run
   ``cmake -DCUDA_GENERATION=Kepler -DWITH_CUDA:BOOL=ON -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/path/to/scipion/software . > /path/to/scipion/software/log/opencv_cmake.log 2>&1``
   substituting correct path and micro-architecture
4. Modify source files in opencv-2.4.9 folder according to
   `this <https://github.com/opencv/opencv/pull/2975/files>`__ and `this
   fix <https://github.com/guysoft/opencv/commit/0a48b9ae776a03e1c4f09e7e3cd0e1c21f3ca75c>`__
5. Re-run ``scipion install``, opencv now should compile cleanly \*\*\*

Scipion freezes after click on open bibtex
==========================================

This likely happens because your machine doesn't have a default program
to open bibtex. Type this in your terminal to set gedit as your default
program for bibtex files:

::

    xdg-mime default gedit.desktop text/x-bibtex

--------------

Compiling Scipion in Opensuse
=============================

Scipion instalationin Opensuse sometimes involves a few drawbacks. Once
in the terminal the compilation has been launched,
``./scipion install``, stop the installation (``Crtl+C``). It is
neccesary to change the python version (download python 2.7.13). Copy
the download file to ``scipion\software\tmp\`` and edit next file
``scipion\software\install\script.py``

The line in which the python version is specified must be modified by
the downloaded version 2.7.13, it means to substitute the old version
2.7.8 by 2.7.13. Finally we can go to the terminal again and relaunch
the installation by doing ``./scipion install``.

--------------

Endless list of CUDA related errors
===================================

**Conditions** \* CUDA set to True (in ``config\scipion.conf``) \*
Multiple CUDA versions are installed

**Example**

::

     /usr/local/cuda/include/crt/common_functions.h:64:0: warning: "__CUDACC_VER__" redefined #define __CUDACC_VER__ "__CUDACC_VER__ is no longer supported. Use __CUDACC_VER_MAJOR__, __CUDACC_VER_MINOR__, and __CUDACC_VER_BUILD__ instead." ^ <command-line>:0:0: note: this is the location of the previous definition

::

     /usr/local/cuda/include/device_atomic_functions.h(107): warning: missing return statement at end of non-void function "atomicAdd"

**Cause**

Version conflict while linking

**Fix**

make sure that all paths to \*CUDA\* and \*NVCC\* in
``config\scipion.conf`` are absolute

--------------

Requirement already satisfied
=============================

**Conditions** 1. you had Scipion already installed (from source) 2.
later on you installed numpy again (e.g. with pandas) 3. you want to
reinstall Scipion (from source)

**Example**

::

    Building numpy ...
    python /home/user/Scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/pip install numpy==1.14.1
    Requirement already satisfied: numpy==1.14.1 in /home/user/.local/lib/python2.7/site-packages
    Error: target '/home/user/Scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy' not built (after running 'python /home/user/Scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/pip install numpy==1.14.1')

**Cause**

Numpy version conflict?

**Fix**

uninstall Scipion's version of numpy

::

    scipion run pip uninstall numpy
    rm -rf software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy

run install again

::

    scipion install -j 8

--------------

ImportError: cannot import name HTTPSHandler
============================================

**Example**

.. code:: python

    Building pip ...
    python scripts/get-pip.py -I --no-setuptools
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "scripts/get-pip.py", line 19177, in <module>
        main()
      File "scripts/get-pip.py", line 194, in main
        bootstrap(tmpdir=tmpdir)
      File "scripts/get-pip.py", line 82, in bootstrap
        import pip
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/__init__.py", line 16, in <module>
        # *
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/vcs/subversion.py", line 9, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/index.py", line 30, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/wheel.py", line 39, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/_vendor/distlib/scripts.py", line 14, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/_vendor/distlib/compat.py", line 31, in <module>
    ImportError: cannot import name HTTPSHandler
    Error: target 'scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/pip' not built (after running 'python scripts/get-pip.py -I --no-setuptools')

**Cause**

Missing libssl-dev

**Fix**

.. code:: bash

    sudo apt-get install libssl-dev
    rm -rf software/bin/python* software/lib/python2.7/
    ./scipion install

--------------

Launching XMIPP3 CL2D protocol
==============================

If executing Xmipp3-cl2d protocol fails with an error:

::

    .../Scipion/Projects/release-1.2.1/scipion/software/em/xmipp/bin/xmipp_mpi_classify_CL2D: error while loading shared libraries: libmpi.so.1: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory
    ...
    ...
    ...
    Protocol failed: Command 'mpirun -np 4 -bynode  `which xmipp_mpi_classify_CL2D` -i
    Runs/002697_XmippProtCL2D/tmp/input_particles.xmd --odir Runs/002697_XmippProtCL2D/extra --oroot level --nref 8
    --iter 10  --distance correlation --classicalMultiref --nref0 2' returned non-zero exit status 127

This means that the libmpi.so.1 library installed on your computer
cannot open.

\*\* Fix \*\*

Create a symbolic link to this library at the location of the libmpi.so
library.

Example:

ln -s /usr/lib/libmpi.so /usr/lib/libmpi.so.1

ImportError: libgfortran.so.3
=============================

This has been reported on an UBUNTU-18 machine using binaries, but may
happen at compile time using sources. It was happening when launching
scipion. The error reported looked like this:

::

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/apps/pw_manager.py", line 32, in <module>
        from pyworkflow.gui.project import ProjectManagerWindow
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/gui/__init__.py", line 27, in <module>
        from gui import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/gui/gui.py", line 34, in <module>
        from pyworkflow.utils.properties import Message, Color, Icon
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/utils/__init__.py", line 30, in <module>
        from utils import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/utils/utils.py", line 32, in <module>
        import numpy as np
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/__init__.py", line 153, in <module>
        from . import add_newdocs
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/add_newdocs.py", line 13, in <module>
        from numpy.lib import add_newdoc
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/lib/__init__.py", line 18, in <module>
        from .polynomial import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/lib/polynomial.py", line 19, in <module>
        from numpy.linalg import eigvals, lstsq, inv
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/linalg/__init__.py", line 50, in <module>
        from .linalg import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/linalg/linalg.py", line 29, in <module>
        from numpy.linalg import lapack_lite, _umath_linalg
    ImportError: libgfortran.so.3: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory

**Cause**: Missing libgfortran.so.3

**Fix** :

The missing library can be installed using:
``sudo apt-get install libgfortran3``

bigtiff in Claudio
==================

We have updated the tiff library to handle BIGtiff data and it will be
available from Scipion version 2.0.0. If you are running Claudio
(v1.2.1) there are some steps you can follow to enable Scipion to work
with bigtiff data. Please, take into account that this hasn't been
extensively tested but all our tests where successful. Our
recommendation would be to wait for v2.0 release (Spring 2019 aprox.).

**Fix:**

If you are determined to move forward follow this steps:

1. open a terminal and cd to the scipion folder
2. backup your old libtiff files:

::

    mkdir software/lib/old_tiff
    mv software/lib/libtiff* software/lib/old_tiff/

3. modify scipion to use libtiff 4.0.10 (bigtiff lib)

``sed -i -e s/tiff-3.9.4/tiff-4.0.10/ install/script.py``

4. Tell scipion to install bigtiff

``./scipion install tiff --no-xmipp``


Install Xmipp3 in Diocletian
============================

Because we haven't installed
xmipp yet, you'll see a message saying something like this in the
terminal:

::

   Scipion v2.0 (2019-03-12) Diocletian (release-2.0.0-fixes 50b9908)

   >>>>> python  /home/yaiza/Desktop/scipion/pyworkflow/apps/pw_manager.py

   >>> WARNING: Xmipp binaries not found. Ghost active.....BOOOOOO!
      > Please install Xmipp to get full functionality.
   (Configuration->Plugins->scipion-em-xmipp in Scipion manager window)

* Open Plugin Manager

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/scipion_config_menu.png
   :alt: Scipion project manager

* Select Xmipp to install it by clicking on the empty checkbox on the left.

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_install_xmipp.png
   :alt: plugin manager

* Add the number of processors you'd like to use (the more, the merrier!).
  Then click on the install button on the operations tab

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_install_xmipp_install_button.png
   :alt:  plugin manager install xmipp

* Now we can check the progress on the Output log tab (or go make some coffee, Xmipp
  installation will take a bit!).
  You might have to refresh the logs by clicking on the refresh symbol on the right.
  Please note that messages might not appear in order if we are using more than 1 processor.

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_xmipp_install_logs.png
   :alt: install xmipp logs

* When the operation gets a green check, it's done!

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_xmipp_done.png
   :alt: install xmipp logs

**Note**: if xmipp installation fails, you might have to uninstall it with the plugin manager:

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_xmipp_uninstall.png
   :alt: uninstall xmipp

And manually remove leftover elements:

::

   rm -rf software/em/xmipp*

* Now when we close and re-launch Scipion, we should get no messages.

::

  ./scipion

   Scipion v2.0 (2019-03-12) Diocletian (release-2.0.0-fixes 50b9908)

   >>>>> python  /home/yaiza/Desktop/scipion/pyworkflow/apps/pw_manager.py

Commit message:

Relion3 compilation with g++5 and CUDA8

docs/user/troubleshooting.rst, after:

.. figure:: /docs/images/scipion_logo.gif
   :width: 250
   :alt: scipion logo

.. _troubleshooting:

===============
Troubleshooting
===============

This page compiles a list of common errors that can appear when
using Scipion.

.. contents::

Installing Scipion/Xmipp from precompiled bundles
=================================================
We have checked the following Operative Systems for the installation using the precompiled bundles:

- Centos7: works with Scipion_Centos and Xmipp_Centos
- Ubuntu16: works with Scipion_Ubuntu and Xmipp_Debian
- Ubuntu18: workks with Scipion_Ubuntu and Xmipp_Debian
- OpenSUSE42.3: works with Scipion_Ubuntu and Xmipp_Debian

For OpenSUSE15 and Debian, installation from sources is needed, so far.

Fixing libjbig.so.0 not found in OpenSUSE42.3
===================================

When Scipion_Ubuntu precompiled bundle is installed, maybe a "libjbig.so.0 not found" error is raised. We have observed that OpenSUSE includes libjbig.so.2 and we have checked that is also valid, thus we propose to link one to the other by

::

  sudo ln -s /usr/lib64/libjbig.so.2 /usr/lib64/libjbig.so.0

Fixing fonts in Ubuntu 18
=========================
The Scipion font is not right in Ubuntu 18. A temporary fix for this is to
move all TK and TCL files in `software/lib` and use the system ones.


Launching Eman boxer protocol
=============================

If you see an error like '*Cannot mix incompatible Qt library (version
0x40806) with this library (version 0x40804)*'. This means the Qt
installed on your computer is conflicting with the Qt distributed with
EMAN2. In most cases it gets solved by removing the Qt that comes with
EMAN2 from EMAN2DIR/extlib/lib.

Relion3 compilation with CUDA8.0 and g++>6
==========================================

If you are getting an error telling that g++ later than 6 is not supported 
by nvcc8, you can set a lower g++ compiler in the ``$SCIPION_HOME/config/scipion.conf``
for instance ``CC=gcc-5`` and ``CXX=g++-5``. To do that you need to have gcc/g++-5 installed. 

--------------

Compiling Scipion with OpenCV
=============================

If you have problems compiling Scipion with OpenCV support (CUDA version
>=6.5), e.g. opencv-2.4.9 compilation fails with an error:

::

    Error: target 'software/lib/libopencv_core.so' not built (after running 'make install > /home/user/soft/scipion/software/log/opencv_make_install.log 2>&1')

And log file (*software/log/opencv\_make.log*) shows something like:

::

    [ 9%] Building NVCC (Device) object modules/core/CMakeFiles/cuda_compile.dir/src/cuda/cuda_compile_generated_gpu_mat.cu.o
    /usr/include/string.h: In function ‘void* __mempcpy_inline(void, const void, size_t)’:
    /usr/include/string.h:652:42: error: ‘memcpy’ was not declared in this scope
    return (char *) memcpy (__dest, __src, __n) + __n;
    ^
    CMake Error at cuda_compile_generated_gpu_mat.cu.o.cmake:264 (message):
    Error generating file
    /home/mag/opencv/build_opencv_master/modules/core/CMakeFiles/cuda_compile.dir/src/cuda/./cuda_compile_generated_gpu_mat.cu.o

Then:

1. `Find <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nvidia_Tesla>`__ the
   micro-architecture name for your GPU card, e.g. Kepler for K40 or
   Fermi for M2070 card
2. ``cd $SCIPION_HOME/software/tmp/opencv-2.4.9``
3. Run
   ``cmake -DCUDA_GENERATION=Kepler -DWITH_CUDA:BOOL=ON -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/path/to/scipion/software . > /path/to/scipion/software/log/opencv_cmake.log 2>&1``
   substituting correct path and micro-architecture
4. Modify source files in opencv-2.4.9 folder according to
   `this <https://github.com/opencv/opencv/pull/2975/files>`__ and `this
   fix <https://github.com/guysoft/opencv/commit/0a48b9ae776a03e1c4f09e7e3cd0e1c21f3ca75c>`__
5. Re-run ``scipion install``, opencv now should compile cleanly \*\*\*

Scipion freezes after click on open bibtex
==========================================

This likely happens because your machine doesn't have a default program
to open bibtex. Type this in your terminal to set gedit as your default
program for bibtex files:

::

    xdg-mime default gedit.desktop text/x-bibtex

--------------

Compiling Scipion in Opensuse
=============================

Scipion instalationin Opensuse sometimes involves a few drawbacks. Once
in the terminal the compilation has been launched,
``./scipion install``, stop the installation (``Crtl+C``). It is
neccesary to change the python version (download python 2.7.13). Copy
the download file to ``scipion\software\tmp\`` and edit next file
``scipion\software\install\script.py``

The line in which the python version is specified must be modified by
the downloaded version 2.7.13, it means to substitute the old version
2.7.8 by 2.7.13. Finally we can go to the terminal again and relaunch
the installation by doing ``./scipion install``.

--------------

Endless list of CUDA related errors
===================================

**Conditions** \* CUDA set to True (in ``config\scipion.conf``) \*
Multiple CUDA versions are installed

**Example**

::

     /usr/local/cuda/include/crt/common_functions.h:64:0: warning: "__CUDACC_VER__" redefined #define __CUDACC_VER__ "__CUDACC_VER__ is no longer supported. Use __CUDACC_VER_MAJOR__, __CUDACC_VER_MINOR__, and __CUDACC_VER_BUILD__ instead." ^ <command-line>:0:0: note: this is the location of the previous definition

::

     /usr/local/cuda/include/device_atomic_functions.h(107): warning: missing return statement at end of non-void function "atomicAdd"

**Cause**

Version conflict while linking

**Fix**

make sure that all paths to \*CUDA\* and \*NVCC\* in
``config\scipion.conf`` are absolute

--------------

Requirement already satisfied
=============================

**Conditions** 1. you had Scipion already installed (from source) 2.
later on you installed numpy again (e.g. with pandas) 3. you want to
reinstall Scipion (from source)

**Example**

::

    Building numpy ...
    python /home/user/Scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/pip install numpy==1.14.1
    Requirement already satisfied: numpy==1.14.1 in /home/user/.local/lib/python2.7/site-packages
    Error: target '/home/user/Scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy' not built (after running 'python /home/user/Scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/pip install numpy==1.14.1')

**Cause**

Numpy version conflict?

**Fix**

uninstall Scipion's version of numpy

::

    scipion run pip uninstall numpy
    rm -rf software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy

run install again

::

    scipion install -j 8

--------------

ImportError: cannot import name HTTPSHandler
============================================

**Example**

.. code:: python

    Building pip ...
    python scripts/get-pip.py -I --no-setuptools
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "scripts/get-pip.py", line 19177, in <module>
        main()
      File "scripts/get-pip.py", line 194, in main
        bootstrap(tmpdir=tmpdir)
      File "scripts/get-pip.py", line 82, in bootstrap
        import pip
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/__init__.py", line 16, in <module>
        # *
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/vcs/subversion.py", line 9, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/index.py", line 30, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/wheel.py", line 39, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/_vendor/distlib/scripts.py", line 14, in <module>
      File "/tmp/tmpXJbtSy/pip.zip/pip/_vendor/distlib/compat.py", line 31, in <module>
    ImportError: cannot import name HTTPSHandler
    Error: target 'scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/pip' not built (after running 'python scripts/get-pip.py -I --no-setuptools')

**Cause**

Missing libssl-dev

**Fix**

.. code:: bash

    sudo apt-get install libssl-dev
    rm -rf software/bin/python* software/lib/python2.7/
    ./scipion install

--------------

Launching XMIPP3 CL2D protocol
==============================

If executing Xmipp3-cl2d protocol fails with an error:

::

    .../Scipion/Projects/release-1.2.1/scipion/software/em/xmipp/bin/xmipp_mpi_classify_CL2D: error while loading shared libraries: libmpi.so.1: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory
    ...
    ...
    ...
    Protocol failed: Command 'mpirun -np 4 -bynode  `which xmipp_mpi_classify_CL2D` -i
    Runs/002697_XmippProtCL2D/tmp/input_particles.xmd --odir Runs/002697_XmippProtCL2D/extra --oroot level --nref 8
    --iter 10  --distance correlation --classicalMultiref --nref0 2' returned non-zero exit status 127

This means that the libmpi.so.1 library installed on your computer
cannot open.

\*\* Fix \*\*

Create a symbolic link to this library at the location of the libmpi.so
library.

Example:

ln -s /usr/lib/libmpi.so /usr/lib/libmpi.so.1

ImportError: libgfortran.so.3
=============================

This has been reported on an UBUNTU-18 machine using binaries, but may
happen at compile time using sources. It was happening when launching
scipion. The error reported looked like this:

::

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/apps/pw_manager.py", line 32, in <module>
        from pyworkflow.gui.project import ProjectManagerWindow
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/gui/__init__.py", line 27, in <module>
        from gui import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/gui/gui.py", line 34, in <module>
        from pyworkflow.utils.properties import Message, Color, Icon
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/utils/__init__.py", line 30, in <module>
        from utils import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/pyworkflow/utils/utils.py", line 32, in <module>
        import numpy as np
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/__init__.py", line 153, in <module>
        from . import add_newdocs
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/add_newdocs.py", line 13, in <module>
        from numpy.lib import add_newdoc
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/lib/__init__.py", line 18, in <module>
        from .polynomial import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/lib/polynomial.py", line 19, in <module>
        from numpy.linalg import eigvals, lstsq, inv
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/linalg/__init__.py", line 50, in <module>
        from .linalg import *
      File "/home/xxx/bin/scipion/software/lib/python2.7/site-packages/numpy/linalg/linalg.py", line 29, in <module>
        from numpy.linalg import lapack_lite, _umath_linalg
    ImportError: libgfortran.so.3: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory

**Cause**: Missing libgfortran.so.3

**Fix** :

The missing library can be installed using:
``sudo apt-get install libgfortran3``

bigtiff in Claudio
==================

We have updated the tiff library to handle BIGtiff data and it will be
available from Scipion version 2.0.0. If you are running Claudio
(v1.2.1) there are some steps you can follow to enable Scipion to work
with bigtiff data. Please, take into account that this hasn't been
extensively tested but all our tests where successful. Our
recommendation would be to wait for v2.0 release (Spring 2019 aprox.).

**Fix:**

If you are determined to move forward follow this steps:

1. open a terminal and cd to the scipion folder
2. backup your old libtiff files:

::

    mkdir software/lib/old_tiff
    mv software/lib/libtiff* software/lib/old_tiff/

3. modify scipion to use libtiff 4.0.10 (bigtiff lib)

``sed -i -e s/tiff-3.9.4/tiff-4.0.10/ install/script.py``

4. Tell scipion to install bigtiff

``./scipion install tiff --no-xmipp``


Install Xmipp3 in Diocletian
============================

Because we haven't installed
xmipp yet, you'll see a message saying something like this in the
terminal:

::

   Scipion v2.0 (2019-03-12) Diocletian (release-2.0.0-fixes 50b9908)

   >>>>> python  /home/yaiza/Desktop/scipion/pyworkflow/apps/pw_manager.py

   >>> WARNING: Xmipp binaries not found. Ghost active.....BOOOOOO!
      > Please install Xmipp to get full functionality.
   (Configuration->Plugins->scipion-em-xmipp in Scipion manager window)

* Open Plugin Manager

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/scipion_config_menu.png
   :alt: Scipion project manager

* Select Xmipp to install it by clicking on the empty checkbox on the left.

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_install_xmipp.png
   :alt: plugin manager

* Add the number of processors you'd like to use (the more, the merrier!).
  Then click on the install button on the operations tab

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_install_xmipp_install_button.png
   :alt:  plugin manager install xmipp

* Now we can check the progress on the Output log tab (or go make some coffee, Xmipp
  installation will take a bit!).
  You might have to refresh the logs by clicking on the refresh symbol on the right.
  Please note that messages might not appear in order if we are using more than 1 processor.

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_xmipp_install_logs.png
   :alt: install xmipp logs

* When the operation gets a green check, it's done!

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_xmipp_done.png
   :alt: install xmipp logs

**Note**: if xmipp installation fails, you might have to uninstall it with the plugin manager:

.. image:: /docs/images/guis/plugin_manager_xmipp_uninstall.png
   :alt: uninstall xmipp

And manually remove leftover elements:

::

   rm -rf software/em/xmipp*

* Now when we close and re-launch Scipion, we should get no messages.

::

  ./scipion

   Scipion v2.0 (2019-03-12) Diocletian (release-2.0.0-fixes 50b9908)

   >>>>> python  /home/yaiza/Desktop/scipion/pyworkflow/apps/pw_manager.py
