docs/developer/tutorials/creating-streaming-protocol.rst, before:

.. figure:: /docs/images/scipion_logo.gif
   :width: 250
   :alt: scipion logo

.. _creating-streaming-protocol:

=============================
Creating a Streaming Protocol
=============================

We define a ``Streaming Protocol``  as a processing task that involves the
execution of several steps like any other `Scipion protocol <creating-a-protocol>`_,
but, the inputs might appear during the protocol execution. Is impossible to
plan all the steps(difference between streaming and non streaming protocols).
The list of steps in a streaming protocol is dynamic, that is, they are added
as the inputs arrive. These steps can even be parallelized. You can read more
about defining steps to be executed in parallel in `Parallelization <parallelization>`_.

We will create a simple streaming protocol that connects to
`EMPIAR <https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/emdb/empiar/>`__ (Electron Microscopy
Public Image Archive), downloads a set of Movies and in parallel it will
register them in Scipion.

The general idea of this protocol is as follow:

.. figure:: /docs/images/general/streaming_idea.png
   :width: 750
   :alt: Streaming Idea

In that sence, we will implement the following steps:

1. Create a protocol GUI that admits as a parameter the ID of the EMPIAR dataset
   as well as a stopping criterion (in our case the number of movies to download).

   1.1. Create a protocol specifying that contain steps in parallel.

   1.2. Define the parallel section.


2. Create the steps to download and register the movie set.

   2.1. Read the xml file corresponding to a specific EMPIAR dataset which contains vital information about this movies dataset (sampling rate, dimension, ...).

   2.2. Download one by one movies until a stop criteria is met (amount of download movies).

   2.3. Register the downloaded movies. This step is in streaming. Constantly check if new movies have been downloaded


Defining the protocol class and the GUI
---------------------------------------

The GUI would be as the following figure shows:

.. figure:: /docs/images/general/streaming_protocol.png
   :width: 550
   :alt: Streaming Protocol

The following code contain the class definition and the protocol GUI implementation.
Note that into the ``__init__`` method, the parameter to especify that the protocol
contain steps in parallel is defined. On the other hand, the parallel section is inserted
into the protocol GUI.

.. code-block:: python

    import json
    import requests
    import ftplib
    import os
    import shutil

    from pwem.objects import Movie, SetOfMovies, Float
    from pwem.protocols import EMProtocol
    from pyworkflow.protocol import (params, Positive, String, STATUS_NEW,
                                     STEPS_PARALLEL)
    import pyworkflow.utils as pwutils

    class EmpiarDownloader(EMProtocol):
        """
        Download movies sets from EMPIAR
        """
        _label = 'empiar downloader'
        _outputClassName = 'SetOfMovies' # Defining the output class
        registerFiles = []               # saves the name of the movies that have been downloaded
        _stepsCheckSecs = 3              # time in seconds to check the steps


        def __init__(self, **args):
            EMProtocol.__init__(self, **args)
            self.stepsExecutionMode = STEPS_PARALLEL # Defining that the protocol contain parallel steps

        def _defineParams(self, form):
            form.addSection(label='Entry')
            form.addParam('entryID', params.StringParam, default='10200', # EMPIAR dataset ID
                          label='EMPIAR ID',
                          important=True,
                          allowsNull=False,
                          help='EMPIAR entry ID')
            form.addParam('amountOfImages', params.IntParam, # Stop criteria
                          default=5,
                          label='Amount of Images',
                          validators=[Positive],
                          help='Time that the protocol will be running expressed in seconds')
            form.addParallelSection(threads=3, mpi=1) # Parallel section defining the number of threads and mpi to use



Create the steps to download and register the movie set
--------------------------------------------------------

First, we implement the ``_insertAllSteps`` method to define the diferente steps.
The first step read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR.

.. code-block:: python

        def _insertAllSteps(self):
            self.readXmlFile = self._insertFunctionStep('readXmlFileStep')        # read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR


the code of that method is as follow:

.. code-block:: python

    def readXmlFileStep(self):
            """
            Read the xml file of a specific dataset from EMPIAR repository
            """
            xmlFileName = self.entryID.get()                                                  # dataset ID
            empiarXmlUrl = 'https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/emdb/empiar/api/entry/' + xmlFileName  # URL of EMPIAR API
            try:
                xmlFile = requests.get(empiarXmlUrl, allow_redirects=True)                    # getting the xml file
                content = (json.loads(xmlFile.content.decode('utf-8')))                       # extract the xml content
                empiarName = 'EMPIAR-' + xmlFileName                                          # dataset name
                self.corresponingAuthor = content[empiarName]['corresponding_author']         # dataset authors
                self.organization = String(self.corresponingAuthor['author']['organization']) # authors organization
                self.depositionDate = String(content[empiarName]['deposition_date'])          # dataset deposition date
                self.title = String(content[empiarName]['title'])                             # dataset title
                self.imageSets = content[empiarName]['imagesets']                             # dataset images information
                self.releaseDate = String(content[empiarName]['release_date'])                # dataset release date
                self.datasetSize = String(content[empiarName]['dataset_size'])                # dataset size
                self.empiarName = String(empiarName)
                self.samplingRate = Float(self.imageSets[0]['pixel_width'])                   # images sampling rate
                self.dataFormat = String(self.imageSets[0]['data_format'])                    # images format

                self._store(self)
            except Exception as ex:
                self.setFailed(msg="There was an error downloading the EMPIAR raw "
                                   "images: %s!!!" %ex)

    def _summary(self):
        summary = []
        if hasattr(self, 'empiarName'):
            summary.append('Name: ' + str(self.empiarName))
            summary.append('Author: ' + str(self.organization))
            summary.append('Deposition Date: ' + str(self.depositionDate))
            summary.append('Title: ' + str(self.title))
            summary.append('Release Date: ' + str(self.releaseDate))
            summary.append('Dataset Size: ' + str(self.datasetSize))
        return summary

After the steps execution, the Summary panel shows the following information:


.. figure:: /docs/images/general/summary.png
   :width: 450
   :alt: Summary


After thats, we'll add into ``_insertAllSteps`` method the second step. This step
will download a set of movies.

.. code-block:: python

        def _insertAllSteps(self):
            self.readXmlFile = self._insertFunctionStep('readXmlFileStep')        # read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR
            self.downloadImages = self._insertFunctionStep('downloadImagesStep')  # download the movies and register them in pararell

the implementatio of this method is as follow:

.. code-block:: python

        def downloadImagesStep(self):
            """
            This method connect to EMPIAR repository and download a set of images
            into a specific directory
            """
            # Connection information
            server = 'ftp.ebi.ac.uk'
            username = 'anonymous'
            password = ''

            # Directory information
            directory = '/empiar/world_availability/' + self.entryID.get() + '/data/Movies'

            # Establish the connection
            ftp = ftplib.FTP(server)
            ftp.login(username, password)

            # Change to the proper directory
            ftp.cwd(directory)

            # Loop through files and download each one individually into a specific
            # directory until the stop criteria met
            imagesCount = 1
            for filename in ftp.nlst():
                fileAbsPath = os.path.join(self._getTmpPath(), filename)
                if not os.path.exists(fileAbsPath):
                    fhandle = open(fileAbsPath, 'wb')
                    print(pwutils.yellowStr('Getting: ' + filename), flush=True)
                    ftp.retrbinary('RETR ' + filename, fhandle.write)
                    fhandle.close()
                    shutil.move(fileAbsPath, self._getExtraPath(filename))
                    imagesCount += 1
                    if imagesCount > self.amountOfImages.get():
                        break
            ftp.close()


While the stopping criterion is not met, it will be downloaded to the
specified directory one by one of the movies in the dataset.

The third step consists of closing the movie set that has been registered in
Scipion. The implementation of this step is as follow:

.. code-block:: python

        def closeSetStep(self):
            """
            Close the registered set
            """
            self.outputMovies.setStreamState(SetOfMovies.STREAM_CLOSED)
            self.outputMovies.write()
            self._store()

Remember add into ``_insertAllSteps`` method this step:

.. code-block:: python

        def _insertAllSteps(self):
            self.readXmlFile = self._insertFunctionStep('readXmlFileStep')        # read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR
            self.downloadImages = self._insertFunctionStep('downloadImagesStep')  # download the movies and register them in pararell
            self.closeSet = self._insertFunctionStep('closeSetStep', wait=True)   # close the registered dataset set

**Important**

    We need to set the ``wait`` parameter to ``True`` in order to
    wait until all movies have been registered.

Up to this point, we have only defined the steps of the protocol, but we have
not yet been registering each of the downloaded movies. This process should be
checking given a reasonable time if there are new movies in the download
directory. In that sense, for each movie that is downloaded, a new step will be
created and it will be launched in parallel. At the same time the number of
steps of the protocol will be updated.

In order for these processes to be launched in parallel, the ``prerequisites``
parameter of each of them must be specified (it must be empty. In the case that
we specify IDs as prerequisites, the step will not be executed until the steps
that respond to the IDs have finished).

When a protocol is launched, a check can be made of each of its steps. The
method that is in charge of doing this operation is the ``_stepsCheck`` method,
which when the protocol does not work in streaming it is not necessary to
define it because the input is static. In the case of streaming protocols, an
implementation can be done. In our case we will use this method to check if
there are new movies. If so, then we generate a new step to register it and at
the same time, this new step is added as a dependency (``prerequisites``
parameter) to ``closeSetStep`` step.

.. code-block:: python

        def _stepsCheck(self):
            """ Input movie set can be loaded or None when checked for new inputs
                If None, we load it.
                To allow streaming register a movies, we need to detect a new
                movie ready to register into the extra path folder.
                prerequisites parameter is empty
            """
            depStepsList = []
            if len(self.registerFiles) < self.amountOfImages.get():
                for file in os.listdir(self._getExtraPath()):
                    if file not in self.registerFiles:
                        self.registerFiles.append(file)
                        # Creating a new step to register the new movie
                        lastSteps = self._insertFunctionStep('registerImageStep',
                                                             file,
                                                             prerequisites=[])
                        depStepsList.append(lastSteps)
                        # adding as prerequisites the new step to closeSetStep
                        self._steps[self.closeSet-1].addPrerequisites(*depStepsList)

                    if len(self.registerFiles) >= self.amountOfImages.get(): # The closeSetStep is ready to launch
                        self._steps[self.closeSet].setStatus(STATUS_NEW)

                # Updating the protocol steps
                self.updateSteps()

        def registerImageStep(self, file):
            """
            Register an image taking into account a file path
            """
            newImage = Movie(location=self._getExtraPath(file))
            newImage.setSamplingRate(self.samplingRate.get())
            self._addMovieToOutput(newImage)

        def _addMovieToOutput(self, movie):
            """
            Returns the output set if not available create an empty one
            """
            if hasattr(self, 'outputMovies'): # the output is defined
                outputSet = self.outputMovies
                outputSet.append(movie)
            else:
                outputSet = SetOfMovies.create(self._getPath())
                outputSet.setSamplingRate(self.samplingRate.get())
                outputSet.setStreamState(outputSet.STREAM_OPEN)
                outputSet.append(movie)
                self._defineOutputs(outputMovies=outputSet)
            outputSet.write()
            self._store()

The dependencie steps graph is as follow:

.. figure:: /docs/images/general/graph_steps.png
   :width: 650
   :alt: Graph Steps

Commit message:

tweaks in creating streaming protocol

docs/developer/tutorials/creating-streaming-protocol.rst, after:

.. figure:: /docs/images/scipion_logo.gif
   :width: 250
   :alt: scipion logo

.. _creating-streaming-protocol:

=============================
Creating a Streaming Protocol
=============================

Associated resources
====================
Here you can find resources associated with this content, like videos or presentations used in courses:

`Course presentation <https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1S7o-9dq6BjGUN7K_w5GjsOO0W5vmCV-q2U2xgDRBiAM/edit?usp=sharing>`_

Practice
========
We define a ``Streaming Protocol``  as a processing task that involves the
execution of several steps like any other `Scipion protocol <creating-a-protocol>`_,
but, the inputs might appear during the protocol execution. Is impossible to
plan all the steps (difference between streaming and non streaming protocols).
The list of steps in a streaming protocol is dynamic, that is, they are added
as the input grows. These steps can even be parallelized. You can read more
about defining steps to be executed in parallel in `Parallelization <parallelization>`_.

We will create a simple streaming protocol that connects to
`EMPIAR <https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/emdb/empiar/>`__ (Electron Microscopy
Public Image Archive), downloads a set of movies and in parallel it will
register them as outputs.

The general idea of this protocol is as follow:

.. figure:: /docs/images/general/streaming_idea.png
   :width: 750
   :alt: Streaming Idea

In that sense, we will implement the following steps:

1. Create a protocol GUI that admits as a parameter the ID of the EMPIAR dataset
   as well as a stopping criterion (in our case the number of movies to download).

   1.1. Create a protocol specifying that contain steps in parallel.

   1.2. Define the parallel section.


2. Create the steps to download and register the movie set.

   2.1. Read the xml file corresponding to a specific EMPIAR dataset which contains vital information about this movies dataset (sampling rate, dimension, ...).

   2.2. Download one by one movies until a stop criteria is met (amount of download movies).

   2.3. Register the downloaded movies. This step is in streaming. Constantly check if new movies have been downloaded


Defining the protocol class and the GUI
---------------------------------------

The GUI would be as the following figure shows:

.. figure:: /docs/images/general/streaming_protocol.png
   :width: 550
   :alt: Streaming Protocol

The following code contain the class definition and the protocol GUI implementation.
Note that into the ``__init__`` method, the parameter to especify that the protocol
contain steps in parallel is defined. On the other hand, the parallel section is inserted
into the protocol GUI.

.. code-block:: python

    import json
    import requests
    import ftplib
    import os
    import shutil

    from pwem.objects import Movie, SetOfMovies, Float
    from pwem.protocols import EMProtocol
    from pyworkflow.protocol import (params, Positive, String, STATUS_NEW,
                                     STEPS_PARALLEL)
    import pyworkflow.utils as pwutils

    class EmpiarDownloader(EMProtocol):
        """
        Download movies sets from EMPIAR
        """
        _label = 'empiar downloader'
        _outputClassName = 'SetOfMovies' # Defining the output class
        registerFiles = []               # saves the name of the movies that have been downloaded
        _stepsCheckSecs = 3              # time in seconds to check the steps


        def __init__(self, **args):
            EMProtocol.__init__(self, **args)
            self.stepsExecutionMode = STEPS_PARALLEL # Defining that the protocol contain parallel steps

        def _defineParams(self, form):
            form.addSection(label='Entry')
            form.addParam('entryID', params.StringParam, default='10200', # EMPIAR dataset ID
                          label='EMPIAR ID',
                          important=True,
                          allowsNull=False,
                          help='EMPIAR entry ID')
            form.addParam('amountOfImages', params.IntParam, # Stop criteria
                          default=5,
                          label='Amount of Images',
                          validators=[Positive],
                          help='Time that the protocol will be running expressed in seconds')
            form.addParallelSection(threads=3, mpi=1) # Parallel section defining the number of threads and mpi to use



Create the steps to download and register the movie set
--------------------------------------------------------

First, we implement the ``_insertAllSteps`` method to define the diferente steps.
The first step read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR.

.. code-block:: python

        def _insertAllSteps(self):
            self.readXmlFile = self._insertFunctionStep('readXmlFileStep')        # read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR


the code of that method is as follow:

.. code-block:: python

    def readXmlFileStep(self):
            """
            Read the xml file of a specific dataset from EMPIAR repository
            """
            xmlFileName = self.entryID.get()                                                  # dataset ID
            empiarXmlUrl = 'https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/emdb/empiar/api/entry/' + xmlFileName  # URL of EMPIAR API
            try:
                xmlFile = requests.get(empiarXmlUrl, allow_redirects=True)                    # getting the xml file
                content = (json.loads(xmlFile.content.decode('utf-8')))                       # extract the xml content
                empiarName = 'EMPIAR-' + xmlFileName                                          # dataset name
                self.corresponingAuthor = content[empiarName]['corresponding_author']         # dataset authors
                self.organization = String(self.corresponingAuthor['author']['organization']) # authors organization
                self.depositionDate = String(content[empiarName]['deposition_date'])          # dataset deposition date
                self.title = String(content[empiarName]['title'])                             # dataset title
                self.imageSets = content[empiarName]['imagesets']                             # dataset images information
                self.releaseDate = String(content[empiarName]['release_date'])                # dataset release date
                self.datasetSize = String(content[empiarName]['dataset_size'])                # dataset size
                self.empiarName = String(empiarName)
                self.samplingRate = Float(self.imageSets[0]['pixel_width'])                   # images sampling rate
                self.dataFormat = String(self.imageSets[0]['data_format'])                    # images format

                self._store(self)
            except Exception as ex:
                self.setFailed(msg="There was an error downloading the EMPIAR raw "
                                   "images: %s!!!" %ex)

    def _summary(self):
        summary = []
        if hasattr(self, 'empiarName'):
            summary.append('Name: ' + str(self.empiarName))
            summary.append('Author: ' + str(self.organization))
            summary.append('Deposition Date: ' + str(self.depositionDate))
            summary.append('Title: ' + str(self.title))
            summary.append('Release Date: ' + str(self.releaseDate))
            summary.append('Dataset Size: ' + str(self.datasetSize))
        return summary

Now your protocol should be able to run, try it now, and get some information from the empiar entry xml.

After the execution, the Summary panel should show the following information:


.. figure:: /docs/images/general/summary.png
   :width: 450
   :alt: Summary


Note that all the values that we want to have in the summary (empiarName, organization, ...)
are those from Scipion (String, Integer, ...) that automatically get persisted.

After that, we'll add into ``_insertAllSteps`` method the second step. This step
will download the movies from the entry (self.entryId) ftp until the amount specified (self.amountOfImages) is reached.

.. code-block:: python

        def _insertAllSteps(self):
            self.readXmlFile = self._insertFunctionStep('readXmlFileStep')        # read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR
            self.downloadImages = self._insertFunctionStep('downloadImagesStep')  # download the movies and register them in pararell

the implementation of this method is as follow:

.. code-block:: python

        def downloadImagesStep(self):
            """
            This method connect to EMPIAR repository and download a set of images
            into a specific directory
            """
            # Connection information
            server = 'ftp.ebi.ac.uk'
            username = 'anonymous'
            password = ''

            # Directory information
            directory = '/empiar/world_availability/' + self.entryID.get() + '/data/Movies'

            # Establish the connection
            ftp = ftplib.FTP(server)
            ftp.login(username, password)

            # Change to the proper directory
            ftp.cwd(directory)

            # Loop through files and download each one individually into a specific
            # directory until the stop criteria met
            imagesCount = 1
            for filename in ftp.nlst():
                fileAbsPath = os.path.join(self._getTmpPath(), filename)
                if not os.path.exists(fileAbsPath):
                    fhandle = open(fileAbsPath, 'wb')
                    print(pwutils.yellowStr('Getting: ' + filename), flush=True)
                    ftp.retrbinary('RETR ' + filename, fhandle.write)
                    fhandle.close()
                    shutil.move(fileAbsPath, self._getExtraPath(filename))
                    imagesCount += 1
                    if imagesCount > self.amountOfImages.get():
                        break
            ftp.close()

NOTE: We are aware that the code above will work only with entries having the file under a "data/Movies" folder.
This works for at least 10200 entry and a smarter ftp navigation is needed to work with all EMPIAR entries.

While the stopping criteria is not met, it will be downloading files to the
protocol's temporary folder. Once the download of file is finished it is moved to the extra folder.

Try to run it now and check that the files are being downloaded and end up in the extra folder. Check as well that the limit is taken into account.
There isn0t any code registering the movies in Scipion

The third step consists of closing the movie set that has been registered in
Scipion. The implementation of this step is as follow:

.. code-block:: python

        def closeSetStep(self):
            """
            Close the registered set
            """
            self.outputMovies.setStreamState(SetOfMovies.STREAM_CLOSED)
            self.outputMovies.write()
            self._store()

Remember add into ``_insertAllSteps`` method this step:

.. code-block:: python

        def _insertAllSteps(self):
            self.readXmlFile = self._insertFunctionStep('readXmlFileStep')        # read the dataset xml file from EMPIAR
            self.downloadImages = self._insertFunctionStep('downloadImagesStep')  # download the movies and register them in pararell
            self.closeSet = self._insertFunctionStep('closeSetStep', wait=True)   # close the registered dataset set

**Important**

    We need to set the ``wait`` parameter to ``True`` in order to
    wait until all movies have been registered.

Up to this point, we have only defined the steps of the protocol, but we have
not yet been registering each of the downloaded movies. This process should be
checking given a reasonable time if there are new movies in the download
directory. In that sense, for each movie that is downloaded, a new step will be
created and it will be launched in parallel. At the same time the number of
steps of the protocol will be updated.

In order for these processes to be launched in parallel, the ``prerequisites``
parameter of each of them must be specified (it must be empty. In the case that
we specify IDs as prerequisites, the step will not be executed until the steps
that respond to the IDs have finished).

When a protocol is launched, a check can be made of each of its steps. The
method that is in charge of doing this operation is the ``_stepsCheck`` method,
which when the protocol does not work in streaming it is not necessary to
define it because the input is static. In the case of streaming protocols, an
implementation can be done. In our case we will use this method to check if
there are new movies. If so, then we generate a new step to register it and at
the same time, this new step is added as a dependency (``prerequisites``
parameter) to ``closeSetStep`` step.

.. code-block:: python

        def _stepsCheck(self):
            """ Input movie set can be loaded or None when checked for new inputs
                If None, we load it.
                To allow streaming register a movies, we need to detect a new
                movie ready to register into the extra path folder.
                prerequisites parameter is empty
            """
            depStepsList = []
            if len(self.registerFiles) < self.amountOfImages.get():
                for file in os.listdir(self._getExtraPath()):
                    if file not in self.registerFiles:
                        self.registerFiles.append(file)
                        # Creating a new step to register the new movie
                        lastSteps = self._insertFunctionStep('registerImageStep',
                                                             file,
                                                             prerequisites=[])
                        depStepsList.append(lastSteps)
                        # adding as prerequisites the new step to closeSetStep
                        self._steps[self.closeSet-1].addPrerequisites(*depStepsList)

                    if len(self.registerFiles) >= self.amountOfImages.get(): # The closeSetStep is ready to launch
                        self._steps[self.closeSet].setStatus(STATUS_NEW)

                # Updating the protocol steps
                self.updateSteps()

        def registerImageStep(self, file):
            """
            Register an image taking into account a file path
            """
            newImage = Movie(location=self._getExtraPath(file))
            newImage.setSamplingRate(self.samplingRate.get())
            self._addMovieToOutput(newImage)

        def _addMovieToOutput(self, movie):
            """
            Returns the output set if not available create an empty one
            """
            if hasattr(self, 'outputMovies'): # the output is defined
                outputSet = self.outputMovies
                outputSet.append(movie)
            else:
                outputSet = SetOfMovies.create(self._getPath())
                outputSet.setSamplingRate(self.samplingRate.get())
                outputSet.setStreamState(outputSet.STREAM_OPEN)
                outputSet.append(movie)
                self._defineOutputs(outputMovies=outputSet)
            outputSet.write()
            self._store()

The dependencie steps graph is as follow:

.. figure:: /docs/images/general/graph_steps.png
   :width: 650
   :alt: Graph Steps
